---
layout: post
title: Garbage Collection
description : Garbage Collection in Java - Fundamentals
excerpt: "Deep dive into Java's Garbage Collection."
published: true
---


## Garbage Collection in Java to Test

Garbage Collector is one of the few areas where even experienced Java Developers fumble. Although Garbage Collection in Java is fairly straightforward, the reason why developers don’t have a hold on the topic is because Java itself takes care of this phenomenon and leaves nearly nothing in the hands of the developers. But in order to do better programming one must understand the underlying machinery. This post explains the garbage collection in the most widely used JVM implementation Hotspot which is  provided by Oracle. 

**Mark and Sweep Algorithm** : This algorithm is used by Java for garbage collection. The objective of this algorithm is pretty straightforward as its name suggests. Scan through the entire Heap and mark all the live objects ( which are referenced from the application) . After completing the scan, sweep ( remove the objects from memory ) which are not marked.

Hotspot JVM uses generational data structure for the heap i.e the heap is divided into  generations. The generations are Young Generation and Old Generation. The generations in the heap are based on the analysis that most of the objects in the application are short lived and hence it makes more sense to initially put these objects into one place(Young Generation) and if the objects survive subsequent garbage collections move it to a tenured place (Old Generation).

We’ll discuss about the two in detail, but before that let’s take a look at one of the other non-heap generations provided by the JVM. 
 
**Permanent Generation**:  This generation contains all the metadata of the classes including the code for methods and variables related to class like static variables. ( Note : This generation has been removed in Java 8 ).

**Young Generation**: All the newly created objects are allocated in the young generation.
The young generation is further divided into three spaces.
- Eden Space.
- Survivor Space 1 (S1)
- Survivor Space 2 (S2)

**Old Generation** : After objects in the Young Generation survive a number of garbage collections, they are moved to Old Generation. 

 The ratio between the size of  Young Generation and Old Generation is 1:3 by default. This means that the Old Generation is thrice as large as the Young Generation. However this can be changed using the flag -XX:NewRatio. It is usually preferable that the Young Generation be bigger than the Old Generation but the JVM enforces no hard and fast rules for it. Reference.

**Garbage Collectors** : JVM provides a number of garbage collectors each having  distinct characteristics. Both the Young Generation and the Old Generation can run different garbage collectors.

**Garbage Collectors in Young Generation** 

_Copy ( use -XX:+UseSerialGC flag)_
It uses one thread to copy surviving objects from Eden to Survivor spaces and between Survivor spaces until it decides they've been there long enough, at which point it copies them into the old generation.

_PS Scavenge (use -XX:+UseParallelGC flag)_ 
It uses multiple threads in parallel and has some knowledge of how the old generation is collected (essentially written to work with the serial and PS old gen collectors).

_ParNew (use -XX:+UseParNewGC flag)_ 
It uses multiple threads in parallel and has an internal 'callback' that allows an old generation collector to operate on the objects it collects (really written to work with the concurrent collector).

_G1 Young Generation (enabled with -XX:+UseG1GC)_ 
the garbage first collector, uses the 'Garbage First' algorithm which splits up the heap into lots of smaller spaces, but these are still separated into Eden and Survivor spaces in the young generation for G1

**Garbage Collectors in Old Generation** 

_MarkSweepCompact (use -XX:+UseSerialGC flag)_ 
It uses a serial (one thread) full mark-sweep garbage collection algorithm, with optional compaction.

_PS MarkSweep (use -XX:+UseParallelOldGC flag)_ 
It uses a  parallelised version (i.e. uses multiple threads) of the MarkSweepCompact.

_ConcurrentMarkSweep (use -XX:+UseConcMarkSweepGC flag)_ 
It attempts to do most of the garbage collection work in the background without stopping application threads while it works (there are still phases where it has to stop application threads, but these phases are attempted to be kept to a minimum). Note if the concurrent collector fails to keep up with the garbage, it fails over to the serial MarkSweepCompact collector for (just) the next GC.

_G1 Mixed Generation (use -XX:+UseG1GC)_ 
This uses the 'Garbage First' algorithm which splits up the heap into lots of smaller spaces.

**Example :** 

Now, let us consider the following illustrations for the purpose of understanding. At the start of the application, both Young Generation and Old Generation will be empty.

| Day     | Meal    | Price |
| --------|---------|-------|
| Monday  | pasta   | $6    |
| Tuesday | chicken | $8    |


<table>
<tr>
<td>1</td>
<td>2</td>
</tr>
</table>